Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift (#357)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/accelerators/out-of-tree-drivers.md

---
title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on BareMetal & OpenShift
  - "@zvonkok"
reviewers:
  - TBD
  - "@mrunalp"
approvers:
  - TBD
  - "@mrunalp"
creation-date: 2020-04-03
last-updated: 2020-06-02
status: provisional
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"  
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
---

# Supporting out-of-tree drivers on BareMetal & OpenShift

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

1. Are users willing to provide precompiled DriverContainers (We have already some commitments)?  This helps immensely in disconnected environments and only validated combinations of driver + kernel would be e.g. provided. Source instal should be the fallback solution

## Summary

> Support out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift for enabling custom hardware and third-party kernel modules on container and non-container based operating systems. 

Author: Yes we do not /support/ the drivers but rather we support the mechanism, tools to enable them on OpenShift. We are supporting OLM + Operator and the operands are supported by the vendor (DriverContainer, side-car container for feature discovery, etc)

## Motivation

In OpenShift v3.x out-of-tree drivers could be easily installed on the nodes, since the node was a full RHEL node with a subscription and needed tools were installed easily with yum. 
In OpenShift v4.x this changed with the introduction of RHCOS. There are currently two different documented ways to enable out-of-tree drivers. One way is using a SRO based operator such as the nvidia GPU operator and the other is using kmods-via-containers. 
We want to come up with a unified solution that works for our customers across RHCOS and RHEL. The solution should also help customers that are currently on RHEL7 to consider moving to RHCOS which is fully managed and easier to support in OpenShift.
 
#### Day-1 DriverContainer Management  [OpenShift | BareMetal]
 
TODO: LONGER TERM
 
#### Day-2 DriverContainer Management OpenShift
 
More and more customers/partners want to enable hardware and or software on OpenShift that need kernel drivers, which are currently not (and may never be) upstream   and out-of-tree. 

> We want to provide a unified way to support out-of-tree kernel drivers (multiple) on OpenShift for day-1 (long term) and day-2 (short term). It has to work for classical (RHEL7, 8, Fedora) and container based operating systems (RHCOS, FCOS) in the same way. 

Author: We want to support OCP and OKD.

Many customers/partners are using dkms/akmods as the solution to build, rebuild modules on kernel changes. Adopting dkms is not a solution; we need to  create an own acceptable solution for RHEL and Fedora. 
 
#### Fill the gap of providing drivers that are not yet upstream or never be

> For the DriverContainer we need to cover several stages of driver packaging. 

Reviewer: i know DriverContainer is a concept from SRO, it helps to provide some definitions i think or links for others.

Reviewer: i see terminology is defined at the bottom.  this is easier to follow by moving some of that content up to the top.

Author: There is a terminology section, maybe I move it up, before the proposal section.

Author: I moved it up for clarification before going too much into detail.

> * **github repository or archive** The driver is only available as  source code and is not packaged in any way, this is where KVC can help

Reviewer: i think a brief blurb on state of SRO and kmods-via-containers (KVC) would help improve readability.

* **kmod-{vendor}-src.rpm** The next step is a source RPM package that can be recompiled with rpmbuild. This is also the base for akmods, dkms
* **precompiled-{vendor}-{kernelversion}.rpm** Precompiled RPMS this is the wish thinking to have in the future. DriverContainers could be easily built just by using RPMs. 

Some drivers will *never* be upstreamed and can be in any of the states described above.  The proposed solutions needs to handle drivers in any state and build by "any" tool. 

The compilation of kernel modules was always anticipated to be the fallback solution when dealing with kernel modules. Some kernel modules will always be out-of-tree and are not going to be included in the near future. Some kernel modules are out-of-tree but we are working with the vendors on upstreaming them  to the mainline kernel. 
This work is being done by a virtual-team consisting of an  OpenShift-accelerators  and RHEL-accelerator team responsible for enabling hardware and software on RHEL and OpenShift. 

### Goals

* A unified way to deploy out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift 4.x on all supported Red Hat Operating Systems

> * The solution should avoid rebuilds on every node and allow for distribution of drivers on a cluster using the cluster registry

Reviewer: this implies the internal registry to the cluster, which is fine.  need to read rest of doc, but i think any solution that avoids rebuilds on every node and allows for distribution of drivers on a cluster using an arbitrary image registry (could be off cluster) is fine as well.

* A solution for day-1 and day-2 kernel modules
* Support upgrades of OpenShift Support of multiple kernel module providers
* Hierarchical initialization of kernel modules (modeling dependencies)
*  Handle dependencies between kernel modules (depmod) in tree and out of tree
* Should support disconnected and proxy environments
* Support building a DriverContainer on any host or kernel version (-k flags) e.g CI
* Support heterogeneous cluster: 

>   * OpenShift with RHEL7, 8 and RHCOS 

Reviewer: RHCOS is RHEL8.

Author: I know, the emphasis was on mixed worker nodes. RHEL8 is not "yet" supported as a worker but wanted to make clear that no matter what OS a DriverContainer should work. If it works on RHCOS it will work on RHEL8 as well.

  * OKD is only supporting FCOS nodes for now. 

> * Extended Update Support

Reviewer: what does this mean?

Author: Hmm, must be a leftover from some previous iterations, will remove it.

> 

Author: We will have this functionality, it is possible now, e.g. we can have side-car containers for NFD to advertise more detailed information or use NFD to expose hardware as a extended-resource. We have created a new NFD release  (v0.6) with extended resource support and a general matching mechanism with rules.  See https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/node-feature-discovery/issues/300 for all changes.

> 

Reviewer 2: ok, so we will have the choice of:
1) add this functionality in new operator by running a NFD side-car container
2) use NFD Operator directly to expose extended-resource of hardware enabled by third-party drivers.
but whether 1) or 2) is not decided.

> 

Author: It will be 2. but the new operator will deploy the DriverContainer and optionally the side-car container for NFD. It is a two-phase deployment. 

1. DriverContainer (enable hardware, exposing device files, /sysfs, ..., build artifacts)
2. SIdeCar -- vendor feature discovery (exposing specific characteristics via NFD with labels) 

In the second stage (2) we have the drivers loaded and aux tools running,  so we can extract sophisticated information about the hardware.

### Non-Goals

* The solution is not a replacement for the traditional way of delivering kernel modules, customer/partners should be aware that we prefer they  deliver the drivers upstream
* We are not providing a way how to build the drivers this is business logic of a specific vendor, we are providing the interface to hook into specific stages of a DriverContainer

## Proposal

The SRO pattern showed how to enable hardware and the complete hardware accelerator stack on OpenShift. The heavy-lifting was the management of the DriverContainer. Approximately 5% of the logic behind SRO was used for deploying the remaining parts aka stack. 

> Based on SRO we are going to create a new operator that will solely be used for DriverContainer management providing out of tree drivers on OpenShift. 

Author: One instance that can handle multiple vendors. We want to keep the amount of operators low. SRO is already able to handle multiple vendors, DriverContainers. 

I was thinking if having an separate namespace for each vendor, separating concerns with namespaces.

> SRO can be seen as the upstream project where we test new features and enable more hardware accelerators where this new operator will be the downstream operator shipped by OpenShift for out-of-tree drivers. 

Reviewer: shipped as optional building block to consume from OLM?

Author: SRO is already a community-operator OLM, the "new" (downstream) operator is anticipated to be part of the payload.

Reviewer 3: I think this is one thing where we want to make a call whether it makes sense to ship this by default to simplify life for users since the intent is that one operator will support multiple drivers.

These are options for the name of the operator: 

1. DriverContainerOperator (DCO)
2. KernelModuleOperator  (KMO) 
3. DynamicKernelModuleOperator (DKMO)
4. SpecialResourceOperator v2.0  (SRO)

> #### Combining both approaches

Reviewer: this section is hard to parse, but i know this is WIP

> For managing the module in a container we are going to use KVC as the framework of choice. Targeting RHCOS solves the problem also for RHEL7 and RHEL8. The management of those KVC containers aka DriverContainers are managed by XYZ. 

Reviewer 4: `XYZ` is used starting here without definition. So I get immediately lost :-(

Author: XYZ is a placeholder for the new name of the operator. Will update the doc to reflect that.

Author: @eparis Updated the doc with clarification what XYZ means.

DriverContainers can be annotated and are telling XYZ to wait for full deployment of DaemonSets or Pods. XYZ watches the status of the resources. Some DriverContainers can be in a running state but are executing some scripts before being fully operational. XYZ provides a special annotation for the manifest to look for a specific regex in the container logs to match before declaring a DriverContainer as operational.  This way we can guarantee that drivers are loaded and subsequent resources are running successfully. 

 
#### Supporting Disconnected Environments

XYZ will first try to pull a DriverContainer. If the DriverContainer does not exist, XYZ will kick off a BuildConfig to build the DriverContainer on the cluster.  Administrators could build a DriverContainer upfront and push it to an internal registry. If  is able to pull it, it will ignore the BuildConfig and try to deploy another DriverContainer if specified (ImageContentSourcePolicy). 
 
### Terminology
#### DriverContainers

> DriverContainers are used more and more in cloud-native environments, especially  when run on pure container operating systems to deliver hardware drivers to the host.

Author: UBI based with an layer that adds auxiliary tools for easier management and building (KVC on top) .

---

> title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on BareMetal & OpenShift

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift
```
Bare-metal is a supported platform on OpenShift, and there there is nothing specific here to bare-metal. There is a use-case for kmods in cloud deployments.

  - "@zvonkok"
reviewers:
  - TBD
  - "@mrunalp"
approvers:
  - TBD
  - "@mrunalp"
creation-date: 2020-04-03
last-updated: 2020-06-02
status: provisional
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"  
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
---

> # Supporting out-of-tree drivers on BareMetal & OpenShift

Reviewer 6: Does this mean RHEL BareMetal installation and OpenShift installs? Or OpenShift Baremetal and Cloud installs?

Author: ```suggestion
# Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift
```

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

1. Are users willing to provide precompiled DriverContainers (We have already some commitments)?  This helps immensely in disconnected environments and only validated combinations of driver + kernel would be e.g. provided. Source instal should be the fallback solution

## Summary

> Support out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift for enabling custom hardware and third-party kernel modules on container and non-container based operating systems. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
OpenShift will support out-of-tree and thrid-party kernel drivers and the support software for the underlying operating systems.
```

## Terminology
### DriverContainers

DriverContainers are used more and more in cloud-native environments, especially  when run on pure container operating systems to deliver hardware drivers to the host.

> DriverContainers are not only a delivery mechanism. They are far more than that. They enable the complete user and kernel stack. They configure the hardware, start daemons that are essential for hardware to work and perform other important tasks. 

Reviewer 5: > DriverContainers are not only a delivery mechanism. They are far more than that. 
DriverContainers are not only a delivery mechanism; they are far more than that.

> DriverContainers are used more and more in cloud-native environments, especially  when run on pure container operating systems to deliver hardware drivers to the host.
> 
> DriverContainers are not only a delivery mechanism. They are far more than that. They enable the complete user and kernel stack. They configure the hardware, start daemons that are essential for hardware to work and perform other important tasks. 
>  
> DriverContainers work on RHCOS/RHEL 7,8, Fedora (on a laptop) and they would work on any other distributions that are able to launch containers, assuming there are builds for such. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
DriverContainers are used more and more in cloud-native environments, especially when run on pure container operating systems to deliver hardware drivers to the host. Driver containers are more than a delivery mechanism for the driver itself, as they extend the kernel stack beyond the out-of-box software and hardware features of a specific kernel. Additionally, a driver container can handle the configuration of modules, and start userland services. 
 
DriverContainers work on RHCOS/RHEL 7,8, Fedora (on a laptop) and they would work on any other distributions that are able to launch containers.
```

> With DriverContainers the host stays always "clean", we have no clashes in different library versions or binaries.  Prototyping is far more easier, updates are done by pulling a new container (btw the loading and unloading is done

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With DriverContainers the host stays always "clean", we have no clashes in different library versions or binaries.  Prototyping is far more easier, updates are done by pulling a new container with the loading and unloading done
```

by the DriverContainer with checks on /proc and /sys and other files to make sure that all traces are removed).

> A detailed description of SRO and its inner workings are described in the following two blog posts:  [https://red.ht/2JQuNwB]https://red.ht/2JQuNwB)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A detailed description of SRO and its inner workings are described in the following two blog posts:
* [https://red.ht/2JQuNwB](https://red.ht/2JQuNwB)
```

> [https://red.ht/34ubzq3](https://red.ht/34ubzq3). 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* [https://red.ht/34ubzq3](https://red.ht/34ubzq3)
```

We start by describing how our current solutions work and how we combine and simplify them as the proposed solution.

### Special Resource Operator
 

> For any day-2 management of kernel modules we can leverage SRO features. SRO was written in  such a way that it is highly customizable and configurable to any hardware accelerator or out-of-tree kernel module. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For any day-2 management of kernel modules we can leverage SRO features. SRO was written in such a way that it is highly customizable and configurable to any hardware accelerator or out-of-tree kernel module. 
```

 
SRO supports full lifecycle management of an accelerator stack but it can also be used as a stripped down version to manage e.g only one kernel module. Furthermore SRO can handle multiple kernel modules from different vendors and is able to model a dependency between those too.
 

> Another important feature is the ability to consume build artifacts from other kernel modules to build a more sophisticated DriverContainer. 

Reviewer 5: This sentence should be part of the preceding paragraph.

> Another important feature is the ability to consume build artifacts from other kernel modules to build a more sophisticated DriverContainer. 
> 
> SRO deals with building and managing out-of-tree drivers and vendor stacks that use those drivers. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Another important feature is the ability to consume build artifacts from other kernel modules to build a more sophisticated DriverContainer.  SRO is capable of delivering out-of-tree drivers and supporting software stacks for kernel features and hardware that is not shipped as part of the standard Fedora/RHEL distribution.
```

> Ideally SRO would pull a prebuilt DriverContainer with precompiled drivers from the vendor and just  run it. Updates or downgrades would just be a pull of a container. RHEL provides the DCI (distributed CI) system for customers/partners to get pre-released versions of the kernel with which they could build such DriverContainers. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Ideally, SRO would pull a prebuilt DriverContainer with precompiled drivers from the vendor. Any module updates (and downgrades) will be delivered by container. 
```

> We have several commitments from vendors for building such DriverContainers but it is a long way to go. This is where SRO is taking responsibility and filling the gap. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We have several commitments from vendors for building such DriverContainers but there still is a long way to go. This is where SRO is taking responsibility and filling the gap. 
```

The Special Resource Operator (SRO) is currently only available in OperatorHub. SRO has proven in the past to be the template for enabling hardware when on OpenShift. Its capabilities to handle several DriverContainers with only one copy of SRO running makes it a preferable solution to tackle kmods on OpenShift.  

SRO is going to be a core-component of OpenShift and delivered/managed by CVO.  

### kmods-via-containers (KVC)

> kmods-via-containers is a framework for building and delivering kernel modules via containers. This implementation for this framework was inspired by the work done by Joe Doss on atomic-wireguard.

Reviewer 5: Links to both projects, please.

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/

> kmods-via-containers is a framework for building and delivering kernel modules via containers. This implementation for this framework was inspired by the work done by Joe Doss on atomic-wireguard.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[kmods-via-containers](https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/) is a framework for building and delivering kernel modules via containers. Thes implementation for this framework was inspired by the work done by Joe Doss on [atomic-wireguard](https://github.com/jdoss/atomic-wireguard).
```

This framework relies on 3 independently developed pieces.

> 1. The kmods-via-containers code/config (this repo)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. [The kmods-via-containers code/config](https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/kmods-via-containers)
```

> 1. The kmods-via-containers code/config (this repo)
> 
> Delivers the stencil code and configuration files for building and delivering kmods via containers. It also delivers a service kmods-via-containers@.service that can be instantiated for each instance of the KVC framework.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. kmods-via-containers (https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/kmods-via-containers): Delivers the code examples, configuration and systemd unit files for the delivery and build of kernel module stacks in a container.
```

2. The kernel module code that needs to be compiled

> This repo represents the kernel module code that contains the source code for building the kernel module. This repo can be delivered by vendors and generally nothing about containers. Most importantly, if someone wanted to deliver this kernel module via the KVC framework, the owners of the code don't need to be consulted.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This repo represents the kernel module code that contains the source code for building the kernel module. This repo can be delivered by vendors and generally nothing about containers. Most importantly, if someone wanted to deliver this kernel module via the KVC framework, the owners of the code don't need to be consulted. The project provides an [example kmod repo](https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/simple-kmod).
```

3. A KVC framework repo for the kernel module to be delivered

This repo defines a container build configuration as well as a library, userspace tools, and config files that need to be created on the host system. This repo does not have to be developed by the owner of the kernel module that is wanted to be delivered.

It must define a few functions in the bash library:

* build_kmods()
  * Performs the kernel module container build
* load_kmods()
  * Loads the kernel module(s)
* unload_kmods()
  * Unloads the kernel module(s)
* wrapper()
  * A wrapper function for userspace utilities

Customers can hook in their procedures on how to build, load, unload etc their kernel modules. We are providing only an interface not the actual "complicated" implementation of those steps (facade pattern). Customers can then use any tool(s) (akmods, dkms, ..) they need to build their modules. 

Additionally to those callbacks/hooks we need functionality that prepares the kmods (copy the artifacts) and proxy setup. The package managers are ignoring the environment variables for proxies, an extra step is needed to make a container fully proxy aware. 

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

[This repo](https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/kvc-simple-kmod) houses an example using `simple-kmod`.
```

## Motivation

In OpenShift v3.x out-of-tree drivers could be easily installed on the nodes, since the node was a full RHEL node with a subscription and needed tools were installed easily with yum. 
In OpenShift v4.x this changed with the introduction of RHCOS. There are currently two different documented ways to enable out-of-tree drivers. One way is using a SRO based operator such as the nvidia GPU operator and the other is using kmods-via-containers. 
We want to come up with a unified solution that works for our customers across RHCOS and RHEL. The solution should also help customers that are currently on RHEL7 to consider moving to RHCOS which is fully managed and easier to support in OpenShift.
 
#### Day-1 DriverContainer Management  [OpenShift | BareMetal]
 

> TODO: LONGER TERM

Reviewer 6: I _think_ kmods-via-containers fits in pretty well here. While it lacks the tighter integration with the cluster it does have the ability to execute builds and inject the kmod way before the cluster is ready to go.

 
#### Day-2 DriverContainer Management OpenShift
 
More and more customers/partners want to enable hardware and or software on OpenShift that need kernel drivers, which are currently not (and may never be) upstream   and out-of-tree. 
We want to provide a unified way to support out-of-tree kernel drivers (multiple) on OpenShift for day-1 (long term) and day-2 (short term). It has to work for classical (RHEL7, 8, Fedora) and container based operating systems (RHCOS, FCOS) in the same way. 

> Many customers/partners are using dkms/akmods as the solution to build, rebuild modules on kernel changes. Adopting dkms is not a solution; we need to  create an own acceptable solution for RHEL and Fedora. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Many customers/partners are using [dkms](https://github.com/dell/dkms)/akmods as the solution to build, rebuild modules on kernel changes. Adopting dkms/akmods is not a workable solution for OpenShift/OKD; we need to create and own acceptable build and delivery mechanism for RHEL, Fedora, and OpenShift. 
```

 
#### Fill the gap of providing drivers that are not yet upstream or never be

For the DriverContainer we need to cover several stages of driver packaging. 

> * **github repository or archive** The driver is only available as  source code and is not packaged in any way, this is where KVC can help

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* **github repository or archive** The driver is available as source code, is not packaged, and/or is required to be set up before the cluster is available; this is where KVC can help
```

* **kmod-{vendor}-src.rpm** The next step is a source RPM package that can be recompiled with rpmbuild. This is also the base for akmods, dkms
* **precompiled-{vendor}-{kernelversion}.rpm** Precompiled RPMS this is the wish thinking to have in the future. DriverContainers could be easily built just by using RPMs. 

Some drivers will *never* be upstreamed and can be in any of the states described above.  The proposed solutions needs to handle drivers in any state and build by "any" tool. 

The compilation of kernel modules was always anticipated to be the fallback solution when dealing with kernel modules. Some kernel modules will always be out-of-tree and are not going to be included in the near future. Some kernel modules are out-of-tree but we are working with the vendors on upstreaming them  to the mainline kernel. 

> This work is being done by a virtual-team consisting of an  OpenShift-accelerators  and RHEL-accelerator team responsible for enabling hardware and software on RHEL and OpenShift. 

Reviewer 6: This paragraph confuses me a little ... is the work being referenced specifically around getting vendors drivers _in_ tree?

### Goals

* A unified way to deploy out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift 4.x on all supported Red Hat Operating Systems
* The solution should avoid rebuilds on every node and allow for distribution of drivers on a cluster using the cluster registry

> * A solution for day-1 and day-2 kernel modules

Reviewer 5: The meaning of Day-1 and Day-2 kernel modules needs to be fleshed out a lot more.

* Support upgrades of OpenShift Support of multiple kernel module providers
* Hierarchical initialization of kernel modules (modeling dependencies)
*  Handle dependencies between kernel modules (depmod) in tree and out of tree
* Should support disconnected and proxy environments
* Support building a DriverContainer on any host or kernel version (-k flags) e.g CI
* Support heterogeneous cluster: 
  * OpenShift with RHEL7, 8 and RHCOS 

>   * OKD is only supporting FCOS nodes for now. 
> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

I'd recommend striking this. OKD is part of the OpenShift eco-system.

### Non-Goals

> * The solution is not a replacement for the traditional way of delivering kernel modules, customer/partners should be aware that we prefer they  deliver the drivers upstream

Reviewer 5: This statement is vague and needs to be clearly scoped. The "traditional way of delivering kernel modules" is a positional statement and lacks specficitity of the target. For example, the traditional way for Linux in general, RHCOS, RHEL, out-of-tree support, etc.  Perhaps:
```
* Delivery of kernel modules outside the scope of OpenShift
```

> * We are not providing a way how to build the drivers this is business logic of a specific vendor, we are providing the interface to hook into specific stages of a DriverContainer

Reviewer 5: Perhaps: `* The methods, tools, guidance or SDK's for the generation of a kernel module.`
I would recommend we steer clear of business logic and leave this as a purely technical document.

## Proposal

The SRO pattern showed how to enable hardware and the complete hardware accelerator stack on OpenShift. The heavy-lifting was the management of the DriverContainer. Approximately 5% of the logic behind SRO was used for deploying the remaining parts aka stack. 

Based on SRO we are going to create a new operator that will solely be used for DriverContainer management providing out of tree drivers on OpenShift. 

SRO can be seen as the upstream project where we test new features and enable more hardware accelerators where this new operator will be the downstream operator shipped by OpenShift for out-of-tree drivers. 

These are options for the name of the operator: 

1. DriverContainerOperator (DCO)
2. KernelModuleOperator  (KMO) 
3. DynamicKernelModuleOperator (DKMO)
4. SpecialResourceOperator v2.0  (SRO)

> Going forward we will use **XYZ** as the placeholder for the new name of the Operator. 

Reviewer 5: Let's pick a WIP name and run with it to replace **XYZ** for readability.

        destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      images:
      - name: "<vendor>-{{.KernelVersion}}:latest"
      kind: ImageStreamTag
      namespace: "<vendor>-<hardware>"
      pullSecret: "vendor-secret"
      paths:
      - sourcePath: "/usr/src/<vendor>/<artifact>
        destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      claims:
      - name: "<vendor>-pvc"
      mountPath: "/usr/src/<vendor>-<internal>"
  node: 
    selector: "feature.../pci-<VENDOR_ID>.present"
  dependsOn:
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_XYZ>
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_KJI>
```

With the above information XYZ is capable of deducing all needed information to build and manage a DriverContainer. All manifests in XYZ are templates that are templatized during reconciliation with runtime and meta information. 

The name e.g. is used to prefix all resources (Pod, DameonSet, RBAC, ServiceAccount, Namespace, etc) created for this very specific **{vendor}-{hardware}**. The DriverContainer section expects at least the git repository (mandatory) from a vendor. This repository has all tools and scripts to build the kernel module. The base image for a DriverContainer is an UBI7,8  with the KVC (kmod-via-containers)  framework installed. 

> KVC provides hooks to build, load, unload the kernel modules and a wrapper for userspace utilities. We might extend the number of hooks to have a similar interface as dkms. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
KVC provides hooks to build, load, unload the kernel modules and a wrapper for userspace utilities. We might extend the number of hooks to have a similar interface as dkms. 

```

Another important field is the build arguments. We have often seen incompatibility between workloads and driver versions. Selecting a specific version is sometimes the only way to have a workload successfully running on OpenShift or BareMetal.  This field can also be used by an administrator to upgrade or downgrade a kernel module due to CVEs, bug fixes or incompatibility. Some drivers have also some flags  to enable or disable specific features of a driver. 

> The next section is used to filter the nodes on which a kernel module or driver should be deployed on. It makes no sense to deploy drivers on nodes where the hardware is not available. Furthermore this can also be used to target even subsets of special nodes either by creating labels manually or leveraging NFDs hook functionality. 

Reviewer 5: Let's be specific about the "sections." Specifications should be specific to remove ambiguity.

The next section is used to tell XYZ where to find build artifacts from other drivers. Some drivers need e.g. symbol information from kernel modules, header files or the complete driver sources to be built successfully.  We are providing two ways for these artifacts to be consumed.  (1) Some vendors expose the build artifacts in a hostPath. The DriverContainer with KVC needs a hook for preparing the sources, which means it would copy from sourcePath on the host to the destinationDir in the DriverContainer. (2) The other way to get build artifacts is to use an DriverContainer image that is already built do get the needed artifacts (We are assuming here that the vendor is not exposing any artifacts to the host). We can leverage those images in a multi-stage build for the DriverContainer. 

> To retrieve the correct image we are using XYZs templating to inject the correct runtime information, here we are using **{{.KernelVersion}}** as a unique identifier for DriverContainer images. 

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/rhcos/extensions.md may be of interest here as well as `machine-os-content`'s will be providing kernel-devel/headers to be inline with what the nodes should be running. While the extension system itself may not be key for this, the available packages may be helpful.

> For the case when no external or internal repository is available or in a disconnected environment, XYZ can consume also sources from a PVC. This makes it easy to provide XYZ with packages or artifacts that are only available offline. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For the case when no external or internal repository is available or in a disconnected environment, XYZ can consume also sources from a PVC. This makes it easy to provide XYZ with packages or artifacts that are only available offline.

```

There are kernel-modules that are relying on symbols that another kernel-module exports which is also handled by XYZ. We can model this dependency by the dependsOn tag. Multiple XYZ CR names can be provided that have to be done (all states ready)  first before the current CR can be kicked off.  CRs with now dependsOn tag can be executed/created/handled simultaneously. 
 
#### DriverContainer Manifests

> The third part of enablement are the manifests  for the DriverContainer. XYZ provides a set of predefined manifests that are completely templatized and XYZ updates each tag with runtime and meta information. They can be used for any kernel module. Each Pod has a ConfigMap as an entrypoint, this way custom commands or modification can be easily added to any container running with XYZ.  See [https://red.ht/34ubzq3](https://red.ht/34ubzq3) for a complete list of annotations and template parameters. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The third part of enablement are the manifests for the DriverContainer. XYZ provides a set of predefined manifests that are completely templatized and XYZ updates each tag with runtime and meta information. They can be used for any kernel module. Each Pod has a ConfigMap as an entrypoint, this way custom commands or modification can be easily added to any container running with XYZ.  See [https://red.ht/34ubzq3](https://red.ht/34ubzq3) for a complete list of annotations and template parameters. 
```

To ensure that a DriverContainer is successfully running XYZ provides several annotations to steer the behaviour of deployment. We can enforce an ordered startup of different stages. If the drivers are not loaded it makes no sense to startup e.g. a DevicePlugin it will simply fail and all other dependent resources as well. 

> DriverContainers can be annotated and are telling XYZ to wait for full deployment of DaemonSets or Pods. XYZ watches the status of the resources. Some DriverContainers can be in a running state but are executing some scripts before being fully operational. XYZ provides a special annotation for the manifest to look for a specific regex in the container logs to match before declaring a DriverContainer as operational.  This way we can guarantee that drivers are loaded and subsequent resources are running successfully. 

Reviewer 6: This feel like maybe it should be a bulleted list of the abilities being presented. Something like:

* Annotations can be used with XYZ to wait on external DaemonSets or Pods
* Scripts may be executed before DriverContainer is finished execution
* Success can be determined from a regex check on log
* ...

 
#### Supporting Disconnected Environments

> XYZ will first try to pull a DriverContainer. If the DriverContainer does not exist, XYZ will kick off a BuildConfig to build the DriverContainer on the cluster.  Administrators could build a DriverContainer upfront and push it to an internal registry. If  is able to pull it, it will ignore the BuildConfig and try to deploy another DriverContainer if specified (ImageContentSourcePolicy). 

Reviewer 6: Denoting how XYZ knows the DriverContainer will be valid for the running kernel would be helpful. I'd assume this is via container tag.

Author: @ashcrow In the past we have used the tag: `<DRIVER-VERSION>-<KERNEL-VERSION>` depending on the driver. Some drivers are compatible with all kernels from a major release, where the tag would just be: `<DRIVER-VERSION>-<OSMAJOR.MINOR>`

As an administrator I want to enable a hardware stack to enable a specific functionality with several kernel modules. These kernel modules may have an order and the procedure enabling them needs to expose a way to model this dependency.  It may even be the case that a specific module needs kernel modules loaded that are already installed on the node.  The intended clusters are either behind a proxy or completely disconnected and hence the anticipated procedure has to work in these environments too. 

#### Story 3: Day-2 DriverContainer Accelerator (short-term)
As a vendor of a hardware accelerator I want a procedure to enable the accelerator on OpenShift no matter which underlying OS is running on the nodes. The life-cycle of the drivers should be fully managed with the ability to upgrade and downgrade drivers for the accelerator. It should support all kernel versions (major, minor, z-stream) and handle driver errors gracefully. Uninstalling the drivers should not leave any trace of the previous installation (keep the node as clean as possible). The driver will not be upstreamed to the mainline kernel, which means it will always be out-of-tree. 

> #### Story 4: Day-1 DriverContainer (long-term)

Reviewer 6: TODO :smile:

#### Story 5: Multiple Driver Containers with Artifacts  (long-term)
As an administrator I want to enable a specific vendor stack. I need to build kernel modules that are dependent on each other during the build and at the time of loading. Specific build artifacts need to be available during the build not for loading. These artifacts can be available  in another DriverContainer or extracted during runtime. 

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

[BuildConfigs do not support volume mounts](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DEVEXP-17), cannot be used for artifacts on a hostPath. If we have all artifacts stored in a container image, BuildConfig can/could be leveraged for building. Where no build artifacts are needed a BuildConfig is a first choice, because of the functionality it provides (triggers, source, output, etc).
One of the most important things, we have no issues with SELinux, because we are interacting with the same SELinux contexts (container_file_t). Accessing host devices, libraries, or binaries from a container breaks the containment

> as we have to allow containers to access host labels. 

Reviewer 6: Line should move up

> For DriverContainers to build the kernel modules we need entitlements first. The e2e story is described here: [https://bit.ly/2XjZq5D](https://bit.ly/2XjZq5D)

Reviewer 6: Generally speaking I think this is a good idea. Though, as noted above, OCP should have the needed kernel deps available to build kmods as they will be available in the machine-os-content ... but it's also fair to denote entitlement as a need especially when speaking to RHEL outside of OCP.

Author: Some driver-containers need more RPMs to be installed then just kernel-devel and kernel-headers. Some containers have daemons or other auxiliary tools that have dependencies on e.g. elf-utils.

---
title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift
  - "@zvonkok"

> reviewers:

Reviewer 5: Mind populating these fields?

Author: @darkmuggle Added thanks.

---
title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift
  - "@zvonkok"
reviewers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@darkmuggle"
  - "@cgwalter"
approvers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@cgwalters" 
  - "@darkmuggle"
creation-date: 2020-04-03
last-updated: 2020-07-21
status: provisional
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
---

# Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

> 1. Are users willing to provide precompiled DriverContainers (We have already some commitments)?  This helps immensely in disconnected environments and only validated combinations of driver + kernel would be e.g. provided. Source instal should be the fallback solution

Reviewer 7: nit: "instal" -> "install"

## Summary

OpenShift will support out-of-tree and third-party kernel drivers and the support software for the underlying operating systems via containers.

## Terminology

### Day 0, Day 1, Day 2, ...
The terms Day 0, Day 1, Day 2 refer to different phases of the software life cycle. There are different interpretations what Day <Z> means. In the context of OpenShift: 
* Day 1 are all operations involved to install an OpenShift cluster 
* Day 2 are all operations involved after an OpenShift cluster is installed 

In this enhancement we are solely concentrating on Day 2 operations.

### DriverContainers

DriverContainers are used more and more in cloud-native environments, especially when run on pure container operating systems to deliver hardware drivers to the host. Driver containers are more than a delivery mechanism for the driver itself, as they extend the kernel stack beyond the out-of-box software and hardware features of a specific kernel. Additionally, a driver container can handle the configuration of modules, and start userland services. 
 
DriverContainers work on various container capable Linux distributions.
 

> With DriverContainers the host stays always "clean", and does not classh with different library versions or binaries on the host. Prototyping is far more easier, updates are done by pulling a new container with the loading and unloading done by the DriverContainer with checks on /proc and /sys and other files to make sure that all traces are removed).

Reviewer 7: nit: "classh" -> "clash", and "far more easier" -> "easier"

* [https://red.ht/2JQuNwB](https://red.ht/2JQuNwB)
* [https://red.ht/34ubzq3](https://red.ht/34ubzq3)
 
SRO supports full lifecycle management of an accelerator stack but it can also be used as a stripped down version to manage e.g only one kernel module. Furthermore SRO can handle multiple kernel modules from different vendors and is able to model a dependency between those too.
 
Another important feature is the ability to consume build artifacts from other kernel modules to build a more sophisticated DriverContainer. SRO is capable of delivering out-of-tree drivers and supporting software stacks for kernel features and hardware that is not shipped as part of the standard Fedora/RHEL distribution.

Ideally, SRO would pull a prebuilt DriverContainer with precompiled drivers from the vendor. Any module updates (and downgrades) will be delivered by container. 

The Special Resource Operator (SRO) is currently only available in OperatorHub. SRO has proven in the past to be the template for enabling hardware when on OpenShift. Its capabilities to handle several DriverContainers with only one copy of SRO running makes it a preferable solution to tackle kmods on OpenShift.

> SRO is going to be a core-component of OpenShift and delivered/managed by CVO. Here is an example how one can use SRO + KVC to deliver a simple kernel module via container in a OpenShift cluster: [https://bit.ly/2EAlLEF](https://bit.ly/2EAlLEF)

Reviewer: This is a leap.

Why must SRO move under CVO management?  What problem did that solve versus its present path in OLM?

Author: I was not sure if a OLM based operator can prevent upgrades of a cluster. In a cluster with “special resources” which are the high assests of the cluster and not the default CPU nodes, and especailly e.g. with GPUs I do not want an upgrade if the preflight checks cannot guarantee me that the newest kernel  will break it.
22:43
As an OLM operator am I "allowed" to create an ClusterOperator object?

Reviewer 7: > As an OLM operator am I "allowed" to create a ClusterOperator object?

Regardless of whether you get permission to create one, the CVO only cares about ClusterOperators which exist as manifests in the release image, so it wouldn't care about an OLM-child-created ClusterOperator.  For OLM-child updates, there's #592 in flight, which sounds like it might help your use-case.  And I feel like there was earlier OLM-child-update discussion somewhere else too, but I'm not finding it at the moment...

Author: @wking Can you please define "care", you mean even if SRO is creating the ClusterOperator object and setting the right values the CVO will not consider it as a blocker or not-blocker for an upgrade?

Author: @wking https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/357#issuecomment-740121530 either through olm mechanisms or cluster operator object.

* `wrapper()`
  * A wrapper function for userspace utilities

Customers can hook in their procedures on how to build, load, unload etc their kernel modules. We are providing only an interface not the actual "complicated" implementation of those steps (facade pattern). Customers can then use any tool(s) (akmods, dkms, ..) they need to build their modules. 

[This repo](https://github.com/kmods-via-containers/kvc-simple-kmod) houses an example using `simple-kmod`.

## Motivation

In OpenShift v3.x out-of-tree drivers could be easily installed on the nodes, since the node was a full RHEL node with a subscription and needed tools were installed easily with yum. 

In OpenShift v4.x this changed with the introduction of RHCOS. There are currently two different documented ways to enable out-of-tree drivers. One way is using a SRO based operator and the other is using kmods-via-containers. 

We want to come up with a unified solution that works for our customers across RHCOS and RHEL. The solution should also help customers that are currently on RHEL7 to consider moving to RHCOS which is fully managed and easier to support in OpenShift.
 
#### Day-2 DriverContainer Management OpenShift
 

> More and more customers/partners want to enable hardware and or software on OpenShift that need kernel drivers, which are currently not (and may never be) upstream and out-of-tree. 

Reviewer 7: "currently not... out-of-tree" doesn't sound right.  Maybe rephrase to "which are currently (and maybe forever) out of tree and not upstream" or some such?

that would count as tricky in the implementation and anything particularly
challenging to test should be called out.

All code is expected to have adequate tests (eventually with coverage
expectations).

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Special Resource Driver Updates 

Initially, the NFD operator labels the host with the kernel version (e.g. 4.1.2). The SRO reads this kernel version and creates a DaemonSet with a NodeSelector targeting this kernel version and a corresponding image to pull. With the pci-10de label, the DriverContainer will only land on GPU nodes. 

This way we ensure that an image is pulled and placed only on the node where the kernel matches. It is the responsibility of the DriverContainer image builder to name the image the correct way.

If an administrator updates the CR with a new driver version will taint the node rebuild the DriverContainer and un-taint the node with the new drivers running on a node. 

#### Updates in OpenShift

Updates in OpenShift can happen in two ways: 
1. Only the payload (operators and needed parts on top of the OS) is updated
2. The payload and the OS are simultaneously updated. 

> The first case is "easy" the new version of the operator will reconcile the expected state and verify that all parts of the special resource stack are working and then "do" nothing. 

Reviewer 7: Can you expand on verification?  Is this looking at the status of DriverContainer DaemonSet and/or its Pods to see if they are reporting Ready?

Author: SRO can watch for different things via annotations depending on the needs: (1) General availability, resource created (2) All Pods for a DaemonSet are reporting Ready, (3) The log of the Pods in a DaemonSet are checked against a regex see:[https://www.openshift.com/blog/part-2-how-to-enable-hardware-accelerators-on-openshift-sro-building-blocks]( https://www.openshift.com/blog/part-2-how-to-enable-hardware-accelerators-on-openshift-sro-building-blocks)

Author: [https://blog.openshift.com/part-1-how-to-enable-hardware-accelerators-on-openshift/](https://blog.openshift.com/part-1-how-to-enable-hardware-accelerators-on-openshift/) This one for completeness @wking

To be always up to date another possibility would be to register a github/gitlab webhook so every time the DriverContainer code changes a new container could be built. One has just to make sure that the webhook is triggered on a specific release branch, it is not advisable to monitor a fast moving branch (e.g. master) that would trigger frequent builds. 

#### Special Resource Driver Downgrade

Having a look at the example CRs above we can see that one can provide a driver version for a specific hardware aka DriverContainer. will take care of updating the BuildConfig and DriverContainer manifests. Tainting the node as **specialresource.openshift.io/downgrade=true:NoExecute** will evade all running Pods and the DriverContainer can be restarted. When the DriverContainer is again up and running, the node can be un-tainted to allow workloads to be scheduled on the node again. 
 
 
#### Update proactive DriverContainers

> A preferable workflow for updates could also be to be proactive on updates. When OpenShift is updated we would need a mechanism (notification, hook for updates) to provide the kernel version of the next update to before attempting the upgrade and rebooting the nodes (needinfo installer/CVO team) .

Reviewer 7: I'm a bit fuzzy on how machines decide which RHCOS to pivot too.  But maybe your operator could keep an eye on that target, and drop PDB guards onto the DriverContainers to protect them from PDB drains if it saw a target RHCOS with an incompatible kernel?

Author: I was thinking of something more "drastic" measure. Actually I want to prevent any action happening before SRO can give green lights that the driver will work on the next version. [https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/357#issuecomment-748112774](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/357#issuecomment-748112774)

The SRO pattern showed how to enable hardware and the complete hardware
accelerator stack on OpenShift. The heavy-lifting was the management of the
DriverContainer. Approximately 5% of the logic behind SRO was used for deploying
the remaining parts aka stack.

Based on SRO we are going to create a new operator that will solely be used for
DriverContainer management providing out of tree drivers on OpenShift.

SRO can be seen as the upstream project where we test new features and enable
more hardware accelerators where this new operator will be the downstream
operator shipped by OpenShift for out-of-tree drivers.

The new version of SRO will have an API update and hence called SROv2.

### Combining both approaches

For managing the module in a container we are going to use KVC as the framework
of choice. Targeting RHCOS solves the problem also for RHEL7 and RHEL8. The
management of those KVC containers aka DriverContainers are managed by SROv2.

### Day-2 DriverContainer Management OpenShift

For any day-2 kernel module management or delivery we propose using SROv2 as the
building block on OpenShift.

We will run a single copy of the SROv2 as part of OpenShift that is able to

> andle multiple kernel module drivers using the following proposed CR below.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
handle multiple kernel module drivers using the following proposed CR below.
```

The following section will cover three kernel module instantiations (1) A single
kernel module (2) multiple kernel modules with build artifacts (3) full-stack
enablement.

There are three main parts involved in the enablement of a kernel module. We
have a specific (1) set of meta information needed for each kernel module, a (2)
set of manifests to deploy a DriverContainer and lastly (3) a framework running
inside the container for managing the kernel module (dkms like functions).

The following section will walk one through the enablement of the different
use-case scenarios. After deploying the operator the first step is to create an

> instance of a special-resource. Following are some example CRs how to one would

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
instance of a special-resource. Following are some example CRs for how one would
```

instantiate SROv2 to manage a kernel module or hardware driver.

#### Example CR for a single kernel module #1

```yaml
apiVersion: sro.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpecialResource
metadata:
  name: <vendor>-<kmod>
spec:
  driverContainer:
  - git:
      ref: "release-4.3"
      uri: "https://gitlab.com/<vendor>/<kmod>.git"
```

The second example shows the combined capabilities of SROv2 for dealing with
multiple driver containers and artifacts. On the other side SROv2 can also be
used in a minimalistic form where we only deploy a simple kmod. The example CR
above would create only one DriverContainer from the git repository provided.
For each kernel module one would provide one CR with the needed information.

#### Example CR for a hardware vendor (all settings) #2

```yaml
apiVersion: sro.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpecialResource
metadata:
  name: <vendor>-<hardware>
spec:
  metadata:
    namespace: <vendor>-<driver>

>   environment:
>   - key: "key_id"
>     value: "ACCESS_KEY_ID"
>   - key: "access_key"
>     value: "SECRET_ACCESS_KEY"

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  configuration:
  - name: "key_id"
    value: ["AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID"]
  - name: "access_key"
    value: ["AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY"]
```

  driverContainer:
    source:
      git:
        ref: "master"
        uri: "https://gitlab.com/<vendor>/driver.git"
    buildArgs:
    - name: "DRIVER_VERSION"
      value: "440.64.00"
    - name: "USE_SPECIFIC_DRIVER_FEATURE"
      value: "True"
    runArgs:
    - name: "LINK_TYPE_P1" # 1st Port
      value: "2"  #Ethernet
    - name: "LINK_TYPE_P2" # 2nd Port
      value: "2"  #Ethernet
    artifacts:
      hostPaths:
      - sourcePath: "/run/<vendor>/usr/src/<artifact>"
        destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      images:
      - name: "<vendor>-{{.KernelVersion}}:latest"
        kind: ImageStreamTag
        namespace: "<vendor>-<hardware>"
        pullSecret: "vendor-secret"
        paths:
        - sourcePath: "/usr/src/<vendor>/<artifact>
          destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      claims:
      - name: "<vendor>-pvc"
      mountPath: "/usr/src/<vendor>-<internal>"
  node:
    selector: "feature.../pci-<VENDOR_ID>.present"
  dependsOn:
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_SRO>
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_KJI>
```

Since SROv2 will manage several special resources in different namespaces, hence
the CRD will have cluster scope. The SROv2 can take care of creating and

> deleting of the namespace for the specialresource. Otherwise one would have an

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
deleting of the namespace for the specialresource. Otherwise one would have a
```

> the CRD will have cluster scope. The SROv2 can take care of creating and
> deleting of the namespace for the specialresource. Otherwise one would have an
> manual step in creating the new namespace before creating the CR for a
> specialresource, which make cleanup of a special resource easy, just by deleting
> the namespace. If there is no spec.metadata.namespace supplied SROv2 will set

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the CRD will have cluster scope. The SROv2 can take care of creating and 
deleting of the namespace for the specialresource, which makes cleanup of
a special resource easy, just by deleting the namespace. Otherwise one would have a 
manual step in creating the new namespace before creating the CR for a specialresource.  
If there is no spec.metadata.namespace supplied SROv2 will set
```

to build and manage a DriverContainer. All manifests in SROv2 are templates that
are templatized during reconciliation with runtime and meta information.

```yaml
metadata:
  name: <vendor>-<hardware>
spec:
  metadata:
    namespace: <vendor>-<hardware>
  environment:
  - key: "key_id"
    value: "ACCESS_KEY_ID"
  - key: "access_key"
    value: "SECRET_ACCESS_KEY"
  driverContainer:
    source:
      git:
        ref: "master"
        uri: "https://gitlab.com/<vendor>/driver.git"

```

The name e.g. is used to prefix all resources (Pod, DameonSet, RBAC,
ServiceAccount, Namespace, etc) created for this very specific
**{vendor}-{hardware}**. The DriverContainer section expects optionally the git
repository from a vendor. This repository has all tools and scripts to build the
kernel module. The base image for a DriverContainer is an UBI7,8 with the KVC
(kmod-via-containers) framework installed. Simpler builds can be accomplished
by including the Dockerfile into the Build YAML.

KVC provides hooks to build, load, unload the kernel modules and a wrapper for
userspace utilities. We might extend the number of hooks to have a similar
interface as dkms.

> The environment section can be used to provide a arbitrary set of key value

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The environment section can be used to provide an arbitrary set of key value
```

Some hardware accelerators e.g. need to change specific attributes that are
only available after the DriverContainer is executed.

```yaml

    artifacts:
      hostPaths:
      - sourcePath: "/run/<vendor>/usr/src/<artifact>"
        destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      images:
      - name: "<vendor>-{{.KernelVersion}}:latest"
      kind: ImageStreamTag
      namespace: "<vendor>-<hardware>"
      pullSecret: "vendor-secret"
      paths:
      - sourcePath: "/usr/src/<vendor>/<artifact>
        destinationDir: "/usr/src/"
      claims:
      - name: "<vendor>-pvc"
      mountPath: "/usr/src/<vendor>-<internal>"

```
The next section is used to tell SROv2 where to find build artifacts from other
drivers. Some drivers need e.g. symbol information from kernel modules, header
files or the complete driver sources to be built successfully. We are providing
two ways for these artifacts to be consumed. (1) Some vendors expose the build
artifacts in a hostPath. The DriverContainer with KVC needs a hook for preparing
the sources, which means it would copy from sourcePath on the host to the
destinationDir in the DriverContainer. (2) The other way to get build artifacts

> is to use an DriverContainer image that is already built do get the needed

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
is to use a DriverContainer image that is already built to get the needed
```

should be deployed on. It makes no sense to deploy drivers on nodes where the
hardware is not available. Furthermore this can also be used to target even
subsets of special nodes either by creating labels manually or leveraging NFDs
hook functionality.

To retrieve the correct image we are using SROv2s templating to inject the
correct runtime information, here we are using **{{.KernelVersion}}** as a
unique identifier for DriverContainer images.

For the case when no external or internal repository is available or in a
disconnected environment, SROv2 can consume also sources from a PVC. This makes
it easy to provide SROv2 with packages or artifacts that are only available
offline.
```yaml
  dependsOn:
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_SROv2>
      imageReference: "true"
    - name: <CR_NAME_VENDOR_ID_KJI>
```
There are kernel-modules that are relying on symbols that another kernel-module
exports which is also handled by SROv2. We can model this dependency by the
dependsOn tag. Multiple SROv2 CR names can be provided that have to be done
(all states ready) first before the current CR can be kicked off. CRs with now
dependsOn tag can be executed/created/handled simultaneously.

> Users should usually deploy only the top-level CR ans SROv2 will take care of

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Users should usually deploy only the top-level CR and SROv2 will take care of
```

meaning a DaemonSet build for version X will only run on nodes with compatible
kernel X and a DaemonSet with version Y will only run on nodes with compatible
kernel Y. This has the effec that the new DameonSet (Y) will automatically scale
up to the new nodes updated to the new version Y by MCO and the DameonSet (X)
will automatically scale down.

```bash
Node:       N:0   N:1   N:2   N:3   N:4
OS Version: V:Y   V:Y   V:Y   V:Y   V:X
DaemonSet:  D:Y   D:Y   D:Y   D:Y   D:X
```

MCO  will do the rolling update of all the nodes and the DaemonSets will scale
up or scale down automatically, making sure that always a version of the
out-of-tree driver is running on all nodes at any time.

This way SRO can support multiple version skews of OpenShift and handle several
MCPs with different versions running. Depending on the cluster constraints SRO
will also delete obsolete not "supported" DaemonSet DriverContainer versions.

#### Special Resource Driver Downgrade

Having a look at the example CRs above we can see that one can provide a driver
version for a specific hardware aka DriverContainer. will take care of updating

> the BuildConfig and DriverContainer manifests. Tainting the node as

Reviewer 8: A bit unsure what you mean here.

**specialresource.openshift.io/downgrade=true:NoExecute** will evade all running
Pods and the DriverContainer can be restarted. When the DriverContainer is again
up and running, the node can be un-tainted to allow workloads to be scheduled on
the node again.

#### Update proactive DriverContainers

A preferable workflow for updates could also be to be proactive on updates. When
OpenShift is updated we would need a mechanism (notification, hook for updates)

> to provide the kernel version of the next update to before attempting the

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
to provide the kernel version of the next update before attempting the
```

upgrade and rebooting the nodes (needinfo installer/CVO team) .

> This way DriverContainers are prebuild and potential problems can be examined

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This way DriverContainers are prebuilt and potential problems can be examined
```

---
title: Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift
  - "@zvonkok"
reviewers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@darkmuggle"
  - "@cgwalter"
approvers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@cgwalters"
  - "@darkmuggle"
creation-date: 2020-04-03
last-updated: 2020-07-21
status: provisional
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
---

# Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

> 1. Should SRO be CVO or OLM managed, SRO creates an ClusterOperator object for must-gather and better status reporting to customers/developers/users

Reviewer 8: @zvonkok the CO is most importantly needed to prevent upgrades that would render the special resource unusable due to missing drivers for the new kernel version, right? Can you note that here?

Reviewer 3: This should be removed as we agreed this should be OLM managed.

> 2. Should the driver-toolkit container be part of the payload? It should be accessible through registry.

Reviewer 3: This should be captured as yes as we agreed.

registry.redhat.io/openshift4 registry. The build should be done on all z-stream
releases and nightlies to cover pre-release testing of customers and to catch
any changes of the kernel between releases.

Customers that want to build out-of-tree drivers would not need entitlements per
se and would have all needed RPMs at hand. This container should be externally
accessible to be used in customer CI/CD pipelines that do not need a full
cluster installation.

This base container could also be used as the base for developers as a
prototyping and testing tool in the pre-release phase. Tested drivers with a
pre-release would make sure that when a OpenShift version goes GA the customer
has already tested several version before the date.

There could be several z-stream releases with the very same kernel but there
wouldn't be a single z-stream with different kernels.

Currently the driver-toolkit by ART can only be tagged with the OpenShift "full"
 version (x.y.z). Meaning currently it is not easy to relate a specific
 driver-toolkit:vX.Y.Z to a specific node that could be in different versions in
 the cluster depending on the state of MCPs.

> For building the driver-toolkit on the cluster as a fallback solution, if we do
> not have a recent build, the other problematic is that we cannot easily relate
> the correct m-o-c of the nodes.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
If the correct driver-toolkit is not available, SRO can build the driver-toolkit on the cluster as a fallback solution. The problem with this is that we cannot easily relate the correct m-o-c of the nodes.
```
Or similar rephrasing to make this more clear

  - "@zvonkok"
reviewers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@darkmuggle"
  - "@cgwalter"
approvers:
  - "@ashcrow"
  - "@cgwalters"
  - "@darkmuggle"
creation-date: 2020-04-03
last-updated: 2020-07-21
status: provisional
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
replaces:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
superseded-by:
  - "/enhancements/TODO.md"
---

# Supporting out-of-tree drivers on OpenShift

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Open Questions [optional]

1. What is the best way to find out which node belongs to which OpenShift
release (imagine stuck nodes during ugrades)? See also email-thread on
coreos-devel "Can we update os-release to reflect the "full" version
of OpenShift?"
2. Can an OLM managed operator create an ClusterOperator object to manage
upgradeability of the cluster? SRO needs to run some preflight checks
upfront before MCO updates the nodes to make sure the new kernel or

> driver-container is compatible.

Author: @smarterclayton  Can an OLM managed operator create a ClusterOperator object to manage
upgradeability of the cluster? In the case of SRO we do not want to prevent SRO updates, rather we want to make sure the new MCO(+kernel) is compatible with the out-of-tree driver.

### Fill the gap of providing drivers that are not yet, or will never be, upstream

For the DriverContainer we need to cover several stages of driver packaging.

- **source repository or archive** The driver is available as source code, is
not packaged, and/or is required to be set up before the cluster is available;
this is where KVC can help
- **kmod-{vendor}-src.rpm** The next step is a source RPM package that can be
recompiled with rpmbuild. This is also the base for akmods, dkms
- **precompiled-{vendor}-{kernelversion}.rpm** Precompiled RPMS this is the wish
thinking to have in the future. DriverContainers could be easily built just by
using RPMs.

Some drivers will *never* be upstreamed and can be in any of the states
described above. The proposed solutions needs to handle drivers in any state and
build by "any" tool.

The compilation of kernel modules was always anticipated to be the fallback
solution when dealing with kernel modules. Some kernel modules will always be
out-of-tree and are not going to be included in the near future. Some kernel
modules are out-of-tree but we are working with the vendors on upstreaming them
to the mainline kernel.

> ### Goals

Author: Yes, see as a first step:[https://github.com/openshift/driver-toolkit/pull/26]( https://github.com/openshift/driver-toolkit/pull/26)
